#
# This file is autogenerated by pip-compile with Python 3.9
# by the following command:
#
#    pip-compile
#
accelerate==0.27.0
    # via -r requirements.in
aiohttp==3.9.3
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   fsspec
aiosignal==1.3.1
    # via aiohttp
async-timeout==4.0.3
    # via aiohttp
attrs==23.2.0
    # via aiohttp
beautifulsoup4==4.12.3
    # via -r requirements.in
certifi==2024.2.2
    # via requests
charset-normalizer==3.3.2
    # via requests
datasets==2.16.1
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   evaluate
dill==0.3.7
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   multiprocess
evaluate==0.4.0
    # via -r requirements.in
filelock==3.13.1
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   torch
    #   transformers
frozenlist==1.4.1
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   aiosignal
fsspec[http]==2023.10.0
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   torch
huggingface-hub==0.21.4
    # via
    #   accelerate
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   tokenizers
    #   transformers
idna==3.6
    # via
    #   requests
    #   yarl
jinja2==3.1.3
    # via torch
langdetect==1.0.9
    # via -r requirements.in
langid==1.1.6
    # via -r requirements.in
markupsafe==2.1.5
    # via jinja2
mpmath==1.3.0
    # via sympy
multidict==6.0.5
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   yarl
multiprocess==0.70.15
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
networkx==3.2.1
    # via torch
numpy==1.26.4
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   accelerate
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   langid
    #   pandas
    #   pyarrow
    #   transformers
packaging==24.0
    # via
    #   accelerate
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   transformers
pandas==2.2.1
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
psutil==5.9.8
    # via accelerate
pyarrow==15.0.2
    # via datasets
pyarrow-hotfix==0.6
    # via datasets
python-dateutil==2.9.0.post0
    # via pandas
pytz==2024.1
    # via pandas
pyyaml==6.0.1
    # via
    #   accelerate
    #   datasets
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   transformers
regex==2023.12.25
    # via transformers
requests==2.31.0
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   fsspec
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   responses
    #   transformers
responses==0.18.0
    # via evaluate
safetensors==0.4.2
    # via
    #   accelerate
    #   transformers
six==1.16.0
    # via
    #   langdetect
    #   python-dateutil
soupsieve==2.5
    # via beautifulsoup4
sympy==1.12
    # via torch
tokenizers==0.15.2
    # via transformers
torch==2.2.1
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   accelerate
tqdm==4.66.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   transformers
transformers==4.38.1
    # via -r requirements.in
typing-extensions==4.10.0
    # via
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   torch
tzdata==2024.1
    # via pandas
urllib3==2.2.1
    # via
    #   requests
    #   responses
xxhash==3.4.1
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
yarl==1.9.4
    # via aiohttp
